Section six information not available at
the time of the Warren Commission
investigation a Silvia tirado
nee Duran one House Select Committee on
assassinations June 6 1970 8 interview
of Silvia tirado mr. otto Silvia
divorced Horacio Duran in 1968 was never
questioned by American officials in 1963
thus the committee established contact
with the Mexican government and
requested that the Mexican government
makes Silvia tirado available for an
interview the Mexican government
complied On June 6th 1978 mr. otto told
the House Select Committee on
assassinations the following Lee Harvey
Oswald visited the Cuban consulate three
times on September 27 1963 not twice as
the Warren Commission previously
reported oswald first visited the Cuban
consulate at approximately 11 a.m.
requesting an in transit visa to Cuba
with Russia as the final destination he
showed her some documents then left to
obtain photographs needed for his
application
Oswald returned at approximately 1 p.m.
with four photographs mr. otto typed the
application in duplicate stapled a
picture on top of each and had Oswald
sign each in her presence as
identification
Oswald showed her documents he had
brought his Russian labor card marriage
certificate with the name of his Russian
wife his American Communist Party
membership card and his fair play for
Cuba membership card mr. Otto found Lee
Harvey Oswald's behavior suspicious
because normally a communist traveled
only with his passport as belonging to
the Communist Party was illegal in
Mexico in 1963 there was a procedure
whereby the American Communist Party
would arrange visa matters for their
members with the Cuban Communist Party
the American would then come to Mexico
visit the Cuban consulate and receive
his visa immediately when tirado
Oswald why he did not have the American
Communist Party arranged his trip to
Cuba he stated that he had not had the
time after explaining to Oswald that he
had to acquire a Russian visa before he
could receive a Cuban visa tirado jotted
her name and business phone number on a
piece of paper and gave it to Oswald who
then left to get his Russian visa Oswald
returned to the Cuban consulate between
5:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. which was after
normal working hours 10:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m. the guard called tirado stating
that someone who did not speak Spanish
was at the gate inquiring about a visa
as routine procedure
she asked the guard to escort the
individual to her office Oswald told her
that he had acquired a Russian visa
since he did not produce it when asked
she called the Russian consulate the
Consul told Duran that Oswald had been
to the consulate requesting a visa and
had been told that the reply would take
approximately four months when she
relayed the message to Oswald he got
very excited insisting that as a person
who had been in jail because of the
Cuban Revolution he should receive a
visa
Oswald stated that he could not wait
that long because his Mexican visa
expired in three days at this time mr.
otto informed consul subi osq of the
situation asked you had been in his
private office which he shared with his
upcoming replacement Alfredo Mirabal
asked you politely explained the
requisites for an in transit visa to
Oswald when he noticed that Oswalt
was a stubborn man he told Oswald that
he was obviously not a friend of the
Cuban Revolution because he would
otherwise understand that Cuba had to be
extremely careful with the people it
allowed in the country as cue and Oswald
yelled at each other then ask you went
to the door opened it and asked Oswald
to leave Oswald did not revisit or
telephone the consulate mr. otto
described Lee Harvey Oswald as
approximately five feet six with sparse
blond hair weighing about 120
five pounds - CIA information not
available at the time of the Warren
Commission investigation a leering three
allegation in 1967 a report that Sylvia
Duran had had intimate relations with
Lee Harvey Oswald came to the attention
of the Central Intelligence Agency's
Mexico City Station the source learing
three stated that he had recently
received a call from Sylvia Duran a
telephone
tap on leering threes telephone
confirmed that Sylvia Duran had called
leering leering three reported that he
had visited Sylvia to renew
acquaintances during the visit
Duran told leering three that she had
met Lee Harvey Oswald at the Cuban
consulate when he applied for a visa and
had dated him on several occasions Duran
admitted that she had had intimate
relations with Oswald but insisted that
she had no idea of his plans
in addition Duran told learing three
that when the news of the assassination
became public knowledge
the Mexican government arrested her and
during the interrogation beat her until
she admitted that she had had an affair
with Lee Harvey Oswald Roton counseled
learing three against any further
contact with Duran because the Cubans or
the Mexican police might become
suspicious of him there is no indication
in rodents report as to why contact with
Sylvia would make the Cubans suspicious
the CIA Mexico City station reported
this information to headquarters
first that Sylvia Duran had sexual
intercourse with Lee Harvey Oswald on
several occasions when the latter was in
Mexico is probably new but adds little
to the Oswald case second the Mexican
police did not report the extent of the
Duran Oswald relationship to the station
in the chronology of the Mexico City
investigation of Oswald Raymond Rocca
notes
why didn't Mexico police give us all
info this was not the first report of
such a relationship between Oswald and
Duran Elena Guerrero had reported the
same information too
Errol's Thomas in 1965 that the Mexican
government did not disclose all the
information in its possession to
American authorities raises one of three
possibilities one the Mexican government
did not want to disclose that one of its
citizens had had intimate relations with
the assassin of John Kennedy or to
Sylvia Duran was a Mexican penetration
agent in the Cuban consulate and the
Mexican government was protecting its
informant by minimizing her relationship
with Oswald or three they forgot I he a
pure and simple mistake be the
possibility that Sylvia Duran was an
agent for either American Mexican or
Cuban intelligence since the publication
of the Warren Commission report in
September 1964 critics have written
about the possibility that Sylvia Duran
was an intelligence agent for either the
Americans Mexicans or Cubans one was
Sylvia Duran an agent asset or source
for Mexican or American intelligence in
an effort to resolve this question the
House Select Committee on assassinations
reviewed the United States investigative
agencies files on Sylvia Duran the
committee found no evidence in this file
review that Sylvia Duran was either an
American or Mexican intelligence agent
in addition the committee has
interviewed most of the mexico city
station employees about the possibility
only David Phillips chief of covert
action and the Cubans section in the
Mexico City station in 1963 a position
which made him very knowledgeable
considered that Duran was possibly an
agent or source mr. Phillips
stated that at one time the agency
pitched almost everyone at the Cuban
embassy mr. Phillips stated that he had
first heard Duran's name from the
telephone intercept transcripts but mr.
Phillips asserted that the CIA had no
interest in mr. an because she wasn't
friendly with anyone mr. Phillips had
previously mentioned the CIA Mexico City
station's interest in recruiting a
former Cuban ambassador
to Mexico named lechuga mr. Phillips was
shown a memorandum written by W David
Slauson of the Warren Commission staff
regarding a trip to Mexico by Warren
Commission staff members which said
quote mr. Scott's chief of the CIA
stationed in Mexico City narrative
disclosed that the CIA's action
immediately after the assassination
consisted basically of alerting all its
confidential sources of information
throughout Mexico to immediately channel
all information into their headquarters
and of compiling as complete dossiers as
possible on Oswald and everyone else
throughout Mexico who at that time the
CIA knew had had some contact with
Oswald this meant especially silvia
duran who because she had previously
been having an affair with lechuga the
former cuban ambassador to Mexico and
presently the Cuban representative at
the United Nations had previously been
of substantial interest to the CIA and
quote mr. Phillips was surprised by this
and stated that no one let me in on this
operation but mr. Phillips added that he
doubted that Duran would have been
pitched because the station could not
identify any of her weaknesses the
committee staff members then told mr.
Phillips about the reporting on file
concerning miss Duran from one of the
station's penetration agents redacted at
the Cuban embassy at one point redacted
had reported to his case officer that
all that would have to be done to
recruit miss Duran was to get a blonde
blue-eyed American in bed with her with
this mr. Phillips said that it did
indeed sound as if the station had
targeted mr. Wran for recruitment that
the station's interest had been
substantial and that the weaknesses and
means had been identified
mr. Phillips pointed out however that
because Duran had been targeted did not
necessarily mean that she had been
pitched in addition he stated that he
had never heard that Duran had been
pitched mr. Phillips did state that he
would expect that mr. rands file at the
CIA would be very thick because of all
the telephone intercepts that can
turned her and the substantial interest
that the station had in her
he stated that much of the material in
her file should predate the
assassination
mr. Phillips stated that he would be
very surprised if mr. Rance 201 file was
small and contained only a few pre
assassination documents this is in fact
the case of the headquarters 201 file
this committee has asked the CIA to make
mr. rands
Mexican pea personality file available
for review the CIA informed the
committee that there was no P file
available on mr. n footnote the HSC a
requested of the CIA on August 20th 1978
an explanation of why there was no P
file on Sylvia Duran Luisa Calderon
Carol Aero Teresa Proenza Proenza who
say Bo asked you Lopez Guillermo or esta
Ruiz perez Gilberto policarpo Lopez Juan
Manuel Calvillo Alonso and June viola
Cobb sharp the agency responded the
following on September 11th 1978 Station
index cards showed the following
information rate 201 numbers and P
numbers 1 Sylvia Duran no info re P
number 2 Luisa Calderon Carol arrow P 8
- 9 - destroyed 3 Teresa Proenza Proenza
no info re P number 4 you say Bo SQ
Lopez P 6 6 1 3 destroyed 5 y mo
arrestees Ruiz Perez no info re P number
6 no index card on Gilberto pilla capo
Lopez there is an index card on one
Gilberto P la carpa Lopez which does not
list any 201 or P number 7 1 Manuel
Calvillo Alonso no info re P number 8
June viola Cobb sharp P 7 3 8 1
destroyed and footnote another CIA
employee Reed
who worked on an Oswald task force in
late September or early October of 1975
dealing with Freedom of Information Act
lawsuits brought against the agency
concerning the files on Lee Harvey
Oswald stated that he believed that mr.
an may have been a source of information
for either the CIA or the Mexicans Mr
redacted could not recall why he
specifically had this recollection but
thought that it was due to something he
had seen in Oswald's file he said that
it may have been the agency's attempts
to protect mr. Wran after the
assassination and the heavy cable
traffic that those attempts generated
that led him to his inference that she
was a source of information for either
the agency or the Mexicans
despite leering threes case officers
asking learing three not to recontact
mr. an mr. Phillips's statements and
redacted x' hazy recollections the
committee cannot definitely resolve
whether Sylvia Duran was a Mexican or
American intelligence agent or source
two was Sylvia Duran a Cuban
intelligence agent in an effort to
resolve this question the HS CA reviewed
the United States investigative agencies
files on Sylvia Duran the committee
found no evidence in the files that
would indicate that mr. an was
associated with Cuban intelligence in
addition the HSC a interviewed most of
the Mexico City station employees about
the possibility that Duran worked for
Cuban intelligence only Barney Hidalgo a
CIA officer who traveled to Mexico City
in 1963 considered the possibility to be
likely mr. Hidalgo professing not to
remember all the details stated that he
thought that Duran was a Cuban
intelligence agent it dalgo said quote
at the time when this contact told me of
silvia duran i tied the two together yes
sir i don't know how at that time it was
obvious to me as an intelligence agent
that there was some connection there but
it was of no interest whatsoever to me I
do remember that when I next saw this
contact of mine I'm
mentioned the fact to him and let him
proceed to do whatever he wanted to end
quote
mr. e dal go further stated that he
never resolved the issue with no
corroborating evidence for mr. Adil goes
memory the committee must conclude that
Silvia Duran was probably never employed
by Cuban intelligence be the Cubans one
yo se Bo as q Lopez when Lee Harvey
Oswald allegedly visited the Cuban
consulate
yo se Bo as Q Lopez and Cuban citizen
was the Cuban console because he had
diplomatic immunity the Cuban government
had never been asked to make him
available for questioning footnote the
US relations with Cuba in 1963 1964 were
not very good C us-cuban relations
section also sq travelled from Mexico to
Cuba on November 18 1963 and footnote
the committee in an effort to
investigate
Oswald's contact with representatives of
the Cuban government asked the Cuban
government to make Eusebio SQ available
for committee and staff interviews the
Cuban government complied with the
committee's request on April 1st 1978
during that interview mr. askew alleged
that the man Jack Ruby shot in the
Dallas police station was not the same
individual who had visited the Cuban
consulate in 1963 in addition mr. askew
stated that Alfredo Mirabal who in
September 1963 had recently arrived from
Cuba to assume the consul's duties had
also been present during Oswald's visit
during a second trip to Cuba the
committee interviewed Alfredo Mirabal
subsequent to this second trip to Havana
the committee asked the Cuban government
to make OSA Bo ask you and Alfredo
Mirabal available for the public
hearings on September 18 1978 the Cuban
government complied with the committee's
request
yo se Bo as q Lopez told the House
Select Committee on assassinations at a
public hearing on September 18 1978 the
following
an individual who gave the name Lee
Harvey Oswald visited the Cuban
consulate on three occasions in late
September and early October 1963 the
individual first visited the Cuban
consulate during working hours
requesting an in transit visa to Cuba
with Russia as the final destination the
man showed the secretary Sylvia Duran
some documents which he believed would
be sufficient to obtain a visa when the
secretary would not grant him a visa the
man asked ask you to see whether upon
examination of the documents he could
grant him a visa ask you answered
negatively the individual then left to
obtain photographs needed for his
application the man probably returned on
September 27 1963 with the photographs
and completed the applications in mr.
Ann's presence as the amount of time
required to process this document could
have taken as long as twenty days or the
response could have been negative asked
you told the man that he could grant him
an in transit visa to Cuba without
consulting his government if he had a
Russian visa the individual then left to
attempt to obtain his Russian visa after
the man left the Cuban consulate asked
you received a telephone call from the
Soviet consulate the Soviet Consul
explained that the man's documents were
legitimate but the Soviet consulate
could not issue a visa until it received
authorization from Moscow emphasizing
that the Cuban consulate never received
visitors after working hours mr. askew
opined that the individual probably
returned to the consulate on September
28th 1963 when asked you explained to
Oswald that he could not grant him a
visa the man made statements directed
against Cuba and called Cuba a
bureaucracy at that point sq became
upset and asked the individual to leave
the consulate Oswald did not revisit the
consulate mr. askew described the man
who visited the consulate as follows a
white male between five foot six and
five foot seven over 30 years of age
very thin long face
with straight eyebrows and a cold look
in his eyes has Q alleged that he would
never have identified Lee Harvey Oswald
as the man who visited the Cuban
consulate in 1963 - Alfredo
Mirabel Diaz Alfredo Mirabal Diaz told
the House Select Committee on
assassinations at a public hearing on
September 18 1978 the following Lee
Harvey Oswald seeking a visa visited the
Cuban consulate twice in September 1963
since Mirabal could not speak English
though he was the new consul ex consul
sq-- handled the matter on both
occasions there were such loud arguments
between Oswald and askew that mineral
ball thought that the man's visit to the
consulate was a case of provocation
though mineral ball caught only glimpses
of the man he opined that the person
whose picture appears on Lee Harvey
Oswald's visa application was the same
Lee Harvey Oswald who visited the
consulate Mirabal was about four meters
away from Oswald each time he caught
glimpses of him Hoss Wald was at the
consulate between 15 and 20 minutes on
each visit see Elena Guerrero de Paz on
October 5th 1964 eleven days after the
publication of the Warren Commission
report Elena
Guerrero deposits story alleging Lee
Harvey Oswald's presence at a party in
Mexico City attended by Cuban government
personnel came to the attention of the
Central Intelligence Agency one Elena's
story as reported October 5th 1964 Elena
Guerrero de Paz and Deborah Guerrero de
Guerrero Galvan first cousins of Horacio
Ruben and Lydia Duran were invited to a
twist party at the home of reuben duran
in the middle of the week in the fall of
1963 Lee Harvey Oswald was alleged to
have been at this party in the company
of two other beatnik looking boys the
Americans remained together the entire
evening and did not dance when Elena
tried to speak with the Americans
she was shifted to another room by one
of her cousins the memo does not state
whether Elena had mentioned which cousin
had not allowed her to speak to the
Americans one of Elena's cousins told
her at the time that he or she did not
know who the Americans were except that
Sylvia Duran an employee of the Cuban
embassy and the wife of Horacio Duran
had brought them to the party the day
after the party Elena and daiba saw the
three Americans on the insurgent ace a
main avenue in Mexico City the
Guerrero's claimed that they had
recognized Oswald's photograph when it
was published after the assassination
silvia Duran's arrest underlined the
garros certainty that the man had been
Lee Harvey Oswald the source of the memo
was a witting Central Intelligence
Agency asset
known by the cripton em like cookie one
whom the committee identified as June
cob sharp while reviewing the lie cookie
file according to Elena Ms Cobb was sent
to her house shortly after the
assassination for a few days by a mutual
friend a Costa Rican writer named Yunus
OTO Mascaro asserted that while at her
house Miss Cobb expressed interest in
the Kennedy assassination
one night Elena's sister Debra who was
visiting got drunk and told the whole
story claiming to be a CIA agent Cobb
suggested that Elena and debbye go to
Texas to tell their story Elena stated
that when Cobbs suggestion was rejected
Cobb stated that she would arrange a
meeting with the CIA station chief the
meeting did not occur because Miss Cobb
was asked to leave the Gaudreau house
evidently because she kicked Alana's cat
a notation on the memo says that like
cookie one never regained contact with
Elena God Rhoda pass the lie cookie memo
was not inserted in either the elena
guerrero or lee harvey oswald p
personality file but in a local leftist
and cuban project file the committee
learned about the memo
from WX 7:24 one a chronological history
of the Oswald case prepared by Raymond
Roca for the CIA in 1967 the memo was
found in December 1965 by Stanley Watson
a marginal notation on WX seven to 41
says why was this not sent to
headquarters the committee has been able
to determine that the memo was forwarded
to headquarters shortly thereafter to
October 12th 1964 CIA memo for the
record on October 12th 1964 the CIA
Mexico City station's chief of covert
action Jim Flannery wrote a memo for the
record reporting that Elena Guerrero de
Paz had told her story to Eunice odyo
the committee has not been able to
determine if Elena God wrote told miss o
do the story personally or if Miss Cobb
related the story to miss o d who
related to tich born footnote Hichborn
was redacted krypton M redacted was a
wedding asset who wrote propaganda
pieces for the CIA after careful review
of redacted CIA file the HSC a has not
been able to establish a link from
redacted to either miss o do or cob end
footnote the story is not as detailed as
the October 5th 1964 version there is no
mention of de barro guerrero Galvan the
story perhaps because of his third hand
differs from the previous story in two
areas it states that the party was at
the Cuban embassy as opposed to Reuben
Duran's and that Elena talked to a Cuban
embassy official instead of her cousin's
about the three Americans attached to
the memo was a note from Flannery to the
chief of station
Winston Scott which read do you want me
to send the gist of this to headquarters
Scott then noted that the memo should be
filed the file indications show that the
memo went into the oswald p file and the
Elena Guevara P file three
November 24th 1964 CIA informant report
on November 24th 1964 a Central
Intelligence Agency agent reported
information derived from an asset light
gent one footnote while reviewing like
aunt one's file the committee determined
that the CIA assets true name was Manuel
Calvillo who elena claimed escorted her
and her daughter to the vermont hotel
for protection the day following JFK's
assassination and footnote the agent
asserted that June Cobb was an American
communist who rented a room from elena
Guerrero in addition the informant
claimed that Elena had also told her
story to an American official at the
Embassy who claimed to represent the
Warren Commission the chief of station
noted that he had asked lie chant 1 to
pursue the story but there is no
indication that the chief of station
followed through with the request for
November 24th 1964 elena
Guevara meeting with Mexico City legal
attache officers Elena and her daughter
reported their story to the Mexico City
legal attache on November 24th 1964 the
legal attache in 1964 was Clark Andersen
they recounted the same story previously
given to June Cobb Sharpe in October
1964 elena gave the date of the party as
September 30th October 1st or October
2nd in 1963 the agent who wrote the
report noted that Lee Harvey Oswald
could not have been identical with the
American allegedly observed by mrs.
Potts at the party if this party were
held on the evening of October 1st or
October 2nd 1963 footnote FBI
investigation of President Kennedy's
assassination had established that Lee
Harvey Oswald had departed mexico city
by bus at 8:30 a.m. on October 2nd 1963
elena insurgent a end footnote elena was
questioned regarding the identity of
other persons attending the party at the
reuben duran home who might have been in
a position to observe the three
americans elena stated that in the
horse of the party her daughter met a
young man named Alejandro at the party
and danced with him he was apparently
quite smitten with the daughter and
tried to call her on several occasions
after the party the daughter did not
take the calls and as a result alejandro
wrote several letters to the daughter
nascaro exhibited two of the letters as
well as a business card which identified
the young man as a trio alejandro la
bonini tenas the letter which miss
Guerrero said was the first written by
the young man to her daughter board the
date September 1st 1963 and the Mexico
City post office postmark dated
September 2nd 1963 when this was pointed
out to miss Guerrero she commented that
the Communists probably had facilities
for falsifying postmarks to investigate
miss Garros story further
representatives from the legal
anti-phase office interviewed a Dario
Alejandro labony niece tenas on
November 27 1964 la Venini recalled that
there were approximately 30 people at
Ruben Durant's party few of whom he knew
he recalled having met a Mexican girl
who had recently returned from living in
France he was unable to fix the date of
the party but felt it was probably early
in September because of a heavy rain
which occurred as they were leaving the
party about 2:00 a.m. la Venini said
that no Americans were present at this
party he was familiar with the physical
description of Lee Harvey Oswald because
of publicity following the assassination
of President Kennedy but otherwise had
no knowledge of him and had never seen
him except for news photographs
following the assassination lava nene
was the only person interviewed by the
legal attache representatives who
attended parties at the duran house in
the September October time frame there
is no indication in the FBI document
that this information was given to the
Central Intelligence Agency's Mexico
City station
five Charles Thomas's first meeting with
Elena Gadara where Lee Harvey Oswald is
discussed on December 10th 1965 Charles
Thomas a political officer at the
American Embassy wrote a memorandum
about a conversation with Elena Guerrero
de Paz the meeting with Elena had been
about other matters but she mentioned
knowing Oswald Thomas noted that she was
reluctant to talk but did Elena's story
reported here is the same as that given
in the lie cookie memo dated October 5th
1964 but with more details
she said that general Jose hey-zeus
Clarke Flores a friend of Ruben Duran's
Sylvia Duran si Bo as q Emilio carbonado
a pro communist writer friend of the de
Rennes and a Latin American Negro man
with red hair
unidentified were at the party a
marginal comment by this entry in W X 72
41 says how did Elena know about a
red-haired Negro Elena also told Thomas
that she had later learned that Sylvia
Duran had been Oswald's mistress while
he was there a note by this entry in WX
seven to 41 says how did Elena Gaudreau
know about Sylvia being the mistress of
Oswald this is 1965 the Mexico City
station did not hear about the Oswald
Duran affair until July 1967 when a CIA
asset learing three reported it Elena
told Thomas that she and her daughter
had gone to the Cuban embassy on
November 23rd 1963 and shouted assassins
and other insults at the Embassy
employees according to Elena that same
day a friend Manuel car vo whom the god
rose thought to be in the governor she
owned took her and her daughter to a
small hotel in the center of Mexico City
Calvillo kept Elena Guerrero and her
daughter there for eight days under the
pretext that they were in danger of
being harmed physically by communists
elena claimed she told Calvillo her
story
and that she wanted to tell it to the
American authorities at the US Embassy
but that Calvillo dissuaded her by
telling her that the American Embassy
was full of communist spies Elena said
that some of the other people who had
been at the party were taken to Veracruz
where they were protected by Governor
Lopez arias she said that reuben duran
reportedly protected by General Clark
Flores was very prosperous and was
driving a big car Elena also claimed
that reuben duran told her months after
the assassination that he was not really
a communist and that killing Kennedy had
been a mistake reuben duran claimed he
had no reason to tell Elena that killing
Kennedy had been a mistake since he had
no involvement Charles Thomas circulated
a copy of his memorandum concerning
Elena's allegations in the American
Embassy including the Central
Intelligence Agency's Mexico City
station to aid them in their
investigation of the John F Kennedy
assassination footnote the House Select
Committee has determined that the
Central Intelligence Agency received the
copy of the Thomas memorandum prior to
December 25th 1965 his next meeting with
Elena Gadara also see below end footnote
the COS wrote a note on the memo what an
imagination she has should we send to
headquarters the officer replied on the
memo suggest sending there have been
stories around town about all this and
Thomas is not the only person she has
talked to if memory serves me didn't
like cookie refer to Oswald and the
local leftists and Cubans in one of her
squibs the Mexico City station cabled
the information in Thomas's December
10th 1965 memorandum of conversation to
CIA headquarters the cable reported that
Elena's story would be checked with lie
chant one against the production from
the Cuban surveillance operation and
other sources
Winston Scott wrote next to the routing
indications on the cable please ask
Charles Thomas if he'll follow up get
questions from an e please let's disk
thanks after the December 10th
memorandum of conversation Winston Scott
and Nathan Farris called Charles Thomas
for a meeting they asked him to get a
more detailed account of Miss Guerrero's
story at this meeting Winston Scott made
it clear that the FBI had full
responsibility for any further
investigation in the Oswald case six
Charles Thomas's meeting with Elena
Gaudreau on December 25th 1965 Thomas
met with Elena again on December 25th
1965 on that date he wrote a memorandum
of conversation which provided a much
more detailed Restatement of Miss
Guerrero's alleged encounter with Lee
Harvey Oswald Elena
admitted that she had spoken to two men
at the Embassy presumably from the legal
attache office Elena said that she did
not tell them the complete story because
the embassy officers did not give much
credence to anything she and Elenita
said she stated that the party had been
at Rueben Duran's home she was unclear
about the date of the party she thought
it had been a few days before the Soviet
astronaut Gagarin visited Mexico she
thought that this would put the party
around September 2nd or 3rd 1963 she
believed that the party was on a Monday
or Tuesday because it was an odd night
for a party Elena could not check her
calendar to refresh her memory at the
time of this interview because the
calendar was in a desk that had been
stored away during the conversation
Elena described Oswald and his
companions the man whom she thought was
Oswald wore a black sweater she said he
was quiet and stared a lot at the floor
one of his companions was very tall and
slender and had long blond hair and a
rather long protruding chin the other
companion was also tall with short light
brown hair and no distinguishing
characteristics the three Americans did
not dance or mix with the other guests
Elena saw the same three men on the
street the next day Elena was certain
that Eusebio Eskew Horatio Duran
Sylvia Duran Lidia Duran David Guerrero
General Clark Flores and his mistress a
doctor from des Lind Hospital a young
American couple who were honeymooning in
Mexico and several other people were at
the party she said that Ricardo gaturro
who she claimed converted Horacio Duran
to communism and his wife Rosario
Castellanos were supposed to be at the
party but did not attend elena alleged
that the red-haired man and emilio
Caballito were not at the party that
Oswald attended but at another party
where car by IDO and asked you got into
a heated argument about President
Kennedy quote they came to the
conclusion that the only solution was to
kill him unquote Elena was not clear on
whether this party was before or after
the party where she met Oswald as SEBI
osq stated that this conversation never
occurred elena reiterated that the
incident at the cuban embassy where she
and her daughter shouted assassins
etc at the Embassy employees occurred on
November 23rd at or about 3 p.m.
Elena and Elaine eita were driven to the
Cuban embassy by Elena's brother who is
embarrassed by their behavior this
occurred before they had seen
photographs of Oswald miss guerrero
claimed that later in the day she and
Elenita were visited by manuel kvo who
told them that they were in serious
danger from the communists and that he
would take them to a small hotel where
they would be safe for a few days
Elena's said she trusted and believed
caballo because he was a known
undercover agent for the Mexico
government he was also a friend of know
a pelham honest and of President Gustavo
Diaz Ordaz Calvillo also told Elena and
her daughter that Sylvia Duran had been
arrested Duran's arrest was not public
information at that time Elena could not
remember the name of the hotel so that
same day she took Thomas to the section
of Mexico City where she thought it was
they found the hotel the hotel Vermont
Elena said that she assumed that
Calvillo had registered them as
relatives or friends
from San Luis Potosi they stayed at the
hotel until the following Friday
November 30th 1963 hardly leaving their
rooms
Elena claimed that while she and Elenita
were at the hotel they saw the photos of
Oswald and realized that he had been the
man at Rubin Durant's party when
Calvillo visited them at the hotel Elena
told him that she wanted to report her
story which she related to Calvillo to
the American Embassy Calvillo
however dissuaded her by saying that the
American Embassy was full of communists
Elena's stated that when she returned
home guards were posted outside her
house elena alleged that after she
returned home she saw her sister day by
Guerrero who had independently come to
the conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald
had been at Rubin Durant's party daiba
was terrified because approximately two
months after the assassination two
communists personally warned her never
to reveal that she had been to a party
with Oswald de baak consequently would
not accompany Elena to the American
Embassy to tell her story on November
24th 1964 Elena's stated that it was
common knowledge that Sylvia had been
Oswald's mistress when asked who could
verify the allegation she could only
remember one person who had told her
this elena claimed that person was
Victor Rico Galan a pro-castro
journalist see section 6a 2a above
subsequent to December 25th 1965 Elena
found her calendar and reconstructed the
date of the party as late September and
not early September when Thomas went to
Faris's office and informed him Ferris
replied that Elena had given the late
September date when she had originally
reported her story at the American
Embassy however mr. Ferris explained to
Thomas that someone who had been at the
twist party had stated that there were
no Americans there mr. Ferris did not
tell mr. Thomas that ario Alejandro
Lavin a nice tenas had provided this
information in 1964 mr. Ferris suggested
that it was
not necessary for Thomas to pursue
Elena's allegations since he considered
the Oswald case closed and had heard all
the rumors before Thomas forwarded the
same day a copy of his memorandum to the
Central Intelligence Agency's Mexico
City Station to aid in its investigation
of the John F Kennedy assassination on
the first page of the memorandum of
conversation
Winston Scott wrote shouldn't we send to
headquarters someone responded of course
the Mexico City station sent a cable to
headquarters on December 12th 1965
reporting that it was following up and
would cable the results 7 December 27th
1965 legal attache memo to the United
States Ambassador Ari Elena Guerrero on
December 27th 1965 Nathan Farris wrote a
memo to the Ambassador reporting that
Elena and her daughter were interviewed
on 17th and 24th of November 1964 by the
legal anti Shay's office in Mexico City
the memo recorded that Elena and her
daughter had furnished information
similar to the information reported in
Thomas's December 10th 1965 memo the
memo further stated quote inquiries
conducted at that time November 1964
however failed to substantiate the
allegations made by mrs. Guerrero de Paz
and her daughter in view of the fact
that mrs. Guerrero deposits allegations
have been previously checked out without
substantiation no further action is
being taken concerning her recent
repetition of those allegations and
quote the legal attache forwarded a copy
of the memorandum to the Central
Intelligence Agency's Mexico City
station prior to December 29th 1965
footnote Winston Scott superimposed a
note to an Goodpasture on this memo
which read quote can we send in a report
to headquarters dismissing our cable
Goodpasture responded done end quote
the cable Winston Scott wanted dismissed
was Emmy xi5 six to one which reported
that station was following up and
cabling results the new cable was
written and sent on December 29th 1965
see text in footnote a cable written by
and Goodpasture on December 29th 1965
reporting the league at interview with
Elena and the league at offices failure
to substantiate Elena's story was sent
to headquarters the cable promised to
keep headquarters advised if any further
information was to develop like cookies
October 5th
1964 memo is attached to the December
29th 1965 cable WX 724 one explained
this in a marginal comment this document
by like cookie was not in Oswald's file
but was copied from a project file and
attached to Emmy xi5 471 29th of
December 65 a note stapled to this cable
by Alan White stated I don't know what
FBI did in November 1964 but the garros
have been talking about this for a long
time and she is said to be extremely
bright and good pastor wrote that the
FBI had found Elena's allegations
unsubstantiated but that we will try to
confirm or refute miss gotto to pass
information and follow-up when Scott
wrote she is also nuts eight CIA
investigation of Elena's allegation that
she created a disturbance at the Cuban
embassy on November 23rd 1963 On
February 3rd 1966 and Goodpasture
forwarded Thomas's December 25th 1965
memo to the Cubans section at the Mexico
City station with an attached note
asking the section to check whether
Elena was seen creating such a
disturbance as they claimed in front of
the Cuban embassy one Cuban section
officer responded no bells ring with me
another one wrote me neither the third
officer wrote no pictures either there
is no indication after reviewing CIA
files that the penetration agents in the
Cuban embassy work we read about Elena's
allegations that there are no pictures
is reasonable since Elena claimed that
the event happened one on a Saturday at
3:00 p.m. when the Cuban embassy was not
normally photographically surveilled and
to the disturbance occurred inside the
Cuban compound HS CA examination of the
CIA Cuban embassy photographic
surveillance showed no surveillance on
November 23rd 1963 the committee found
that Central Intelligence Agency made no
other effort to corroborate miss
Guerrero's allegations nine legal
attache February 23rd 1966 memo to the
United States Ambassador regarding Elena
Garros allegations on February 23rd 1966
the legal attache wrote a memo to the
Ambassador reporting that extensive
investigation failed to disclose that
Oswalt had traveled to Mexico prior to
September 26th 1963 and that no
information had developed that would
show that he had not been in New Orleans
in the early part of that month the memo
reiterated that no further action was
being taken by the FBI because Elena's
allegations had not been substantiated
by it the legal attache forwarded a copy
of this memo to the Central Intelligence
Agency's Mexico City station a marginal
comment made by Raymond Roca next to the
Sentry and W X 724 one says how can it
be ascertained that Oswald did not
travel to Mexico prior to early
September 1963 there must be some basis
for Elena's reporting ten legal attache
memo to Winston Scott Ari Elena's
allegation that she had stayed at the
hotel Vermont from the day after the
assassination until November 30th 1963
on October 13 1966 the legal attache
memo to win Scott reporting that a
reliable confidential informant had
reported that the records of the hotel
Vermont disclosed that one elena Paz
housewife from San Luis Potosi had
registered at the hotel Vermont on
November 23rd 1963 she left on November
30th 1963 the memo said the above
individual may or may not be identical
with elena Guerrero de Paz the House
Select Committee on assassinations has
been unable to determine why the Central
Intelligence Agency and the Federal
Bureau of Investigations waited until
1966 to investigate this aspect of
Elena's story
Charles Thomas's December 25th 1965 memo
stating she and her daughter did not
personally register at the hotel she
thinks Calvillo registered them as
relatives or friends of his from san
luis potos corroborates elena
Guerrero's presence at the hotel Vermont
the entry for the October 13th 1966 Lee
got memo and WX 724 one board the
notation this is what Elena claimed and
no one would believe her 11 Charles
Thomas's September 30th 1969 letter to
State Department and legal attache Jay's
response no further report on Elena's
story was generated until 1969 when
Charles Thomas was selected out of the
United States Foreign Service at that
time he wrote a memorandum to the
Secretary of State which included a
cover letter stating since I was the
embassy officer in Mexico who acquired
this intelligence information I feel a
responsibility for seeing it through to
its final evaluation Charles Thomas's
memorandum stated that he got no
reaction from Nathan Ferris and Winston
Scott regarding his memorandum of
December 25th 1965 in addition Thomas
wrote that the only person to speak to
him about the December 25th 1965
memorandum Clarence Boonstra told him
that Oswald had not been in Mexico on
the date given for the party
Thomas noted that
even when he reiterated that Elena had
not changed her story but rather that
she had now given a more detailed
account Boonstra stated that the date
was wrong and dismissed the entire
affair one of the Mexico City League at
officers
Nathan Farris in reply to Thomas's
letter and memorandum asserted that
Thomas's office had been advised by
memoranda dated December 27 1965 and
February 23rd 1966 that since Elena
Guerrero's allegations had previously
been investigated without substantiation
no further action was being taken
concerning her recent repetition of
those allegations in his report the
league 'its office concluded that either
the counselor for political affairs did
not route the memoranda to Charles
Thomas or the Thomas did not recall
receiving them Thomas wrote that when he
went to Nathan Faris's office to inform
him that Elena had found her calendar
and had reconstructed the date of the
party as late September Farris replied
that Elena had given the late September
date when she had originally reported
her story at the American Embassy
Thomas noted that Farris explained that
someone who had been at the party had
stated that there had not been any
Americans in attendance Thomas wrote
that he had assumed that Elena could
have clearly been mistaken about the
identity of the Americans she saw there
but never doubted that she had seen some
Americans Thomas wrote that Farris had
suggested that it was not necessary for
Thomas to pursue the matter since he
considered the Oswald case closed and
had heard all the rumors before the
legal attache is replied to Thomas's
memo stated that mr. Farris had not told
Thomas that someone who is at the party
had stated that there had not been any
Americans present the legal attache zem
Oh asserted that Thomas had been told
that it would not be necessary for him
to pursue the matter any further
since Elena's story had been
investigated previously without being
substantiated in addition the memo
stated that Thomas had been told that
Elena's story was considered a closed
issue
not that the Oswald case was closed 12
House Select Committee on assassinations
investigation of Elena got roses
allegations the House Select Committee
on assassinations investigated Elena got
roses story both through file reviews
and personal interviews the committee
requested and reviewed the CIA's FBI's
and State Department's files on Elena
Guerrero de Paz Elenita Guerrero de Paz
Manuel Taavi oh no aw Palomares
June Cobb sharp Victor Rico Galan unis
oh do Silvia Duran lydia duran reuben
duran betty Serratos Horacio duran loose
[ __ ] askew and emilio car belly doe only
the elena Guerrero de paz file contained
information on her allegations though
all the names listed above played a role
in elena guerrero deposit story not one
of their files included a reference to
elena Guerrero de paz furthermore the
House Select Committee on assassinations
requested and reviewed the Central
Intelligence Agency's like cookie one
lie chant one learing three and Hichborn
files once again not one of the files
included a mention of elena got roses
allegations the House Select Committee
on assassinations learned that like
cookie one who first reported to the CIA
Elena's allegation was June cob sharp
redacted Manuel Calvillo who had hidden
elena guerrero and her daughter in a
hotel the day following the
assassination he also told Elena that
Silvia Duran had been arrested before
this fact had become public knowledge
since a file review was inconclusive
the committee arranged interviews in
Mexico with reuben duran horatio duran
elena and elena tagajo silvia Duran Lynn
Duran Emilio carbide oh and Betty
Serratos the Mexican government informed
the House Select Committee on
assassinations that Elena and a lenita
Garo disappeared in 1968 during
the student uprisings and have never
returned to Mexico
the officials stated that Elena and her
daughter might be in Spain
the Mexican government reported that
Emilio Caballito could not be found
the others were interviewed between June
1st and June 6th 1978 betty cerritos
lydia duran reuben duran and horatio
duran all stated that Elena was not the
dancing type and therefore did not
attend any of the Twist parties at the
Duran homes when Silvia Duran was asked
if Elena or Elena tagajo ever attended
twist parties at the Duran homes she
recalled Elena attending one twist party
at Rubens home in 1963 after the garros
returned to Mexico from France all the
Duran's denied that Lee Harvey Oswald
had attended any party at any one of
their homes the committee next asked the
Central Intelligence Agency to arrange
interviews with redacted like kooky one
June Cobb who may have had information
related to Lee Harvey Oswald's trip to
Mexico City the Central Intelligence
Agency declined to aid the committee in
this aspect of the investigation the
committee returned to Mexico City on
August 7th 1978 and attempted to locate
June Cobb sharp and Manuel Calvillo on
its own the Mexican government told the
committee that June Cobb sharp received
a tourist permit number 72 7 8 1 on June
27th 1947 when she entered Mexico
through Nuevo Laredo she asked but was
denied permission to represent the
magazine modern Mexico on June 21st
1948 she received a courtesy permit
number 2 55 56 furthermore the Mexican
government explained that she
disappeared in 1954 and never returned
to Mexico the committee believes that
this information is incorrect according
to miss Cobbs CIA file she worked for
the agency as an asset in Mexico from
1961 through 1966
Elena also stated that miss Cobb resided
at her home in 1964 the Mexican
government told the committee that
Manuel Calvillo did not live at quote 2
MEC 87 7-5 as the committee had informed
it the Mexican government's agent in
charge had spoken to the superintendent
at the apartments at which Manuel
caballo was believed to reside and was
informed by the superintendent who had
worked at the apartments for 25 years
said that know Manuel Calvillo had ever
resided there when committee staffers
gave the Mexican government Calvillo x'
pen name
the Mexicans gave the same answers the
committee believes that there is a
possibility that mr. Calvillo lived at
this address since it acquired the
address from a recent CIA document the
committee believes that there is a
possibility that a US government agency
requested the Mexican government to
refrain from aiding the committee with
this aspect of its work si procedural
right up trip to Mexico City and section
7 see below the committee made every
attempt possible to locate Elena on July
7th 1978 the committee telephoned her
publisher mortise in Mexico City and
inquired about Elena's whereabouts the
publisher stated that miss Guerrero was
living in the hotel si si e in Madrid
Spain the committee telephoned the hotel
si si e in Spain and spoke to the
manager who told him that miss Guerrero
had moved on July 14 1978 the committee
called her publisher again and was told
to contact the Mexican Embassy in Madrid
Spain
the publishers stated that all Elena's
payments were sent there because she did
not even trust her publisher with her
address the committee called the Mexican
Embassy in Madrid Spain and spoke to
Adolfo Padilla
a Mexican employee of the Embassy who
stated that when Elena had visited the
embassy a couple of weeks before to pick
up a check she seemed financially
destitute
he stated that when he asked Elena her
new address she declined to give one
stating that she would return every
weeks to pick up checks and mail the
committee gave Padilla a telephone
number and a message asking Elena to
telephone the committee collect on
September 5th 1978
Elena Garo called the committee when it
was explained that the committee wished
to talk to her in person and would pay
both her daughters and her travel from
Spain to the United States miss gotto
asked why she should believe the
committee was what it claimed to be the
committee asked miss gotto to call back
collect in the next few days when it
could explain to her when and where she
could receive a committee letter
delineating why the committee wished to
interview her the committee wrote the
letter and made arrangements with the
State Department for a letter to be
hand-delivered to Elena at the American
Embassy in Spain on September 7th 1978
Elena Gaudreau called the committee and
asked when the letter would arrive the
committee explained that she could pick
up the letter on Monday September 11th
1978 from George feel on the counselor
for consular affairs at the American
Embassy miss guerrero stated that she
would get the letter on September 11th
1978 and follow our suggestions Mascaro
never went to the American Embassy in
Spain to pick up the committee's letter
the committee hoping she would pick up
the letter before her flight date
proceeded to purchase air tickets for
both Elena and her daughter Elena did
not pick up the tickets at the airport
the committee has not been able to
regain contact with Miss de Paz again
the committee also investigated whether
Charles Thomas's selection out was
related to the Oswald case after
interviewing his widow Miss Cynthia
Thomas the committee has concluded that
his dismissal was unrelated in some the
House Select Committee on assassinations
has not been able to confirm the
evidence that would indicate that Lee
Harvey Oswald on one night while he was
in Mexico attended a twist party at the
home of reuben duran navarro the
brother-in-law of silvia Duran in
addition the House Select Committee on
assassinations has been
unable to confirm the allegation that
Lee Harvey Oswald traveled while in
Mexico City with two beatnik looking
boys a large part of the committee's
attempts to investigate these issues has
met with frustration D Oscar Contreras
Lartigue on March 16 1967 BJ Royal the
American Consul in Tampico reported to
the American Embassy that he had spoken
to a reporter who allegedly had met Lee
Harvey Oswald at the National Autonomous
University of Mexico City in 1963 the
reporter stressing that he had only a
fleeting contact with Oswald had claimed
to have known only about Lee Harvey
Oswald's desire to travel to Cuba and
the Embassy's unwillingness to grant him
a visa
when BJ royal asked the reporter for
permission to cable the story to the
American Embassy the reporter declined
stating that he feared losing his job
subsequent to the assassination the
reporter had told his editor about his
contact with Lee Harvey Oswald who had
advised him not to report it
the reporter granted BJ royal permission
to cable the story to the American
Embassy when royal promised that it
would be handled with the strictest
confidence
royal wrote that he thought the reporter
was genuinely concerned about his job a
letter from BJ royal to the State
Department dated May 11th in 1967
provided additional details of the
reporter's story
the reporter alleged that he and some
fellow students had met Lee Harvey
Oswald as they exited the cinah Club at
the escuela de philosophia school of
philosophy at the National Autonomous
University of Mexico Oswald told the
group that he had gone to the National
Autonomous University of Mexico looking
for pro-castro students who might help
him persuade the Cuban embassy to grant
him a visa
Oswald claimed that he was from
California and was a member of a
pro-castro group in New Orleans Oh
Oswald remained with the students the
rest of that day and evening as well as
the following day
the reporter described Oswald as a
strange and introverted individual who
spoke very little Spanish the State
Department forwarded a copy of Royals
letter to the Central Intelligence
Agency on June 14 1967 CIA headquarters
sent the Mexico City Station a copy of
Royals letter to Boyles CIA headquarters
considered Royals report the first piece
of substantive info about Oswald's
sojourn in Mexico since the
assassination consequently headquarters
cabled that though it understood the
sources reluctance to become involved
the fact remains that this info cannot
continue to be withheld or concealed
headquarters instructed the Mexico City
Station to elicit the identity of the
source from royal in addition
headquarters asked the Mexico City
Station to bear in mind while
interviewing Royals source that Lee
Harvey Oswald was a homosexual
the final sentence of the dispatch it is
our hope that the facts obtained through
these interviews will help to confirm
that several of Garrison's allegations
about involvement of anti-castro Cubans
the CIA etc are false explained the
Central Intelligence Agency's motives
for pursuing the story On June 29th 1967
the Mexico City station cabled
headquarters that a station officer had
gone to Tempe Co where he had
interviewed Royals source Oscar
Contreras the cable reported that
Contreras was a reporter for El Sol
redacted in Tampico was circa 30 years
old married with three children studied
law at the National Autonomous
University of Mexico UN a.m. from 1960
to 1964 belonged to a pro-castro group
at un a.m. was persecuted by the Mexican
police for this affiliation and moved to
Tampico to escape the persecution
Contreras told the Mexico City station
official that he and four other
individuals had met Oswald as they
exited around a table discussion held at
the school of philosophy at un a.m.
footnote
when Contreras was asked to identify the
other four individuals who had met Lee
Harvey Oswald he refused to reveal their
names because he feared that informing
on them might endanger his family in
footnote Contreras stated that Oswalt
had made inquiries on the UN AM campus
about pro Cuban groups and had been
directed to his group Contreras reported
that though the group initially
mistrusted Oswald fearing he was a CIA
provocation they allowed Oswald to
remain with them that day and night and
part of the following day
Contreras noted that Oswald never
mentioned assassination but kept
emphasizing that he had to get to Cuba
in addition Oswald had exhibited no
homosexual tendencies while he was with
the group on July 4th 1967 headquarters
cabled the Mexico City station that
Contreras story should be explored to
the fullest even though he might have
fabricated it headquarters suggested
that the FBI handled the story the
following day July 5th 1967 the Mexico
City station cabled that it preferred
turning Contreras this case over to the
Mexican authorities and to the FBI the
same day the chief of station informed
the league out of Contreras --es story
but asked him not to take any action
without first consulting the Mexico City
station on July 10th 1967 jeremy k
Benedum JK b wrote a memo delineating
the results of a mexican government
review of oscar Contreras file according
to a memo a lone oscar Contreras
appeared in the UN AM law school records
Oscar Contreras Lartigue born February
14 1939 in Ciudad Victoria tamale Paz
the memo also reported that a newspaper
article appearing in Excelsior listed in
Oscar Contreras as a signer of a protest
for the block' estudiante Revolution REO
which had been formed mid 1961 the memo
speculated that country
probably signed the protest as a
frontman to protect the real leaders of
the group the Mexico City station cabled
the information to headquarters the
following day June 11th 1969 the
committee has determined that the
Central Intelligence Agency's main
interest in Oscar Contreras was to
confirm that several of Garrison's
allegations about involvement of
anti-castro Cubans the CIA etc are false
after the CIA Mexico City station
officials interview with Contreras
revealed nothing that could be useful to
the agency it decided to allow the FBI
to follow the story through nonetheless
the agency's Mexico City station
interviewed the key witness reviewed
pertinent files and records about the
witness in the Mexico government's
possession and reported all the
information to headquarters
expeditiously